Enhancements for Submariner to work with OVN Interconnect (#163)
submariner-io/enhancements: submariner/OVN-Interconnect.md

# Submariner Enhancement for OVN Interconnect

<!-- Add link to issue/epic if available -->

## Summary

OVN CNI is moving to a new network topology powered by OVN Interconnect Feature. This allows independent

> OVN deployments to be interconnected by OVN-managed GENEVE tunnels. Submariner does not work with these changes

Reviewer: Can you please link relevant OVN issues/PRs here for reference?

Author: Added in external dependencies.

> OVN deployments to be interconnected by OVN-managed GENEVE tunnels. Submariner does not work with these changes

Reviewer: Re: OVN-managed GENEVE - I am assuming OVN/OpenShift installer (and not Submariner) would need to make sure this traffic is allowed on firewalls?

Author: Yes that is right, OVN/Openshift installer should take care of it.

out of the box and this proposal explains the changes required to support it.

## Proposal

With OVN Interconnect we can have two types of deployment

### Single Zone(Global Zone)

A single-zone deployment will have only one OVN database and a set of master nodes programming it. This is similar to the topology that we
use now. But it will have a single `global` zone assigned to it with a transit switch which is not involved in any packet forwarding. Though this setup is expected to work by default, the subnet that the transit switch
used overlaps with the subnet Submariner uses for the logical router. So we need to agree upon a non-overlapping subnet for Submariner.

### Multiple Zone

> In a multiple-zone setup, we will have an OVN database and a set of master nodes for each zone. Transit switches connect the zones. The OVN-Kubernetes services ensure that the necessary routes are added for pod and service reachability across nodes in different zones.

Reviewer 2: How do we know if its multi zones ovn or single one ?

Author: We will have to scan all the nodes to know if there is multiple node configured. I have added an example of node annotations.

Reviewer 2: Is a one-time test enough?
I mean, is it possible that at t0 we have a single zone and after some time new zones(s) will be added?

Author: it can change at a later point of time. we will have to monitor it.

deployed and the transit switch IP for it.
* When a new node is added or a node joins a zone, the node listener needs to call the NetworkPluginSyncer handler to program the required
rules. It will also remove any existing stale rules.
* When a node leaves no action is needed
* When the gateway nodes join a new zone, leaving the current one, all the switches will need to be reprogrammed as the transit switch IP
can change.

#### Network Plugin Syncer

Based on the info retrieved by the Node listener, the network plugin syncer can provision the Submariner infrastructure and program the
rules in the OVN database.

* If no zone is detected(will be required for backward compatibility) or a global zone is detected the Submariner infrastructure and flows
will remain as it is today.

* If a zone configuration is detected

1) In the gateway node zone a new routing rule can be added to forward the traffic destined for Submariner remote CIDRs
to the Submariner router. This is required for the traffic coming from pods in a node that are in a different zone.

> 2) In the non-gateway zones a route will be added for the traffic destined for remote cluster CIDR to forward it to the gateway node

Reviewer 2: What should happen in a GW switchover ?

Author: This current g/w switch over logic should be able to handle it, depends on the handlers we add the new routes.

Reviewer 2: Maybe it is worth elaborating on the required changes (if any) to support GW switchover

component in OVN) can consume the CRD and program the routing rules and provision the infrastructure required by Submariner.

While this is a cleaner and maintainable implementation it will not be possible to deliver it by the next Submariner release. Also, we need
to agree upon the APIs required in OVN and their implementation.

#### Pros of Option2

This will lead to a more maintainable code and fewer moving parts and this is how we plan Submariner-OVN integration will be in future.

#### Cons of Option2

It takes more time to implement this option. Submariner changes need to wait until OVN changes required for Submariner are done.

## Design Details

### Backward Compatibility

<!-- Any backward compatibility concerns -->

### Alternatives

#### Route Advertisement

Another alternative was explored which could leverage the [route advertisement](
https://docs.ovn.org/en/latest/tutorials/ovn-interconnection.html#route-advertisement) feature in OVN. The idea was to use this capability
to advertise Submariner routes. But this feature seems to be not available in the OVN Kubernetes IC implementation.

## External Dependencies

> <!-- Any external dependencies this proposal may have -->

Reviewer: OVN PRs?

Author: Added the links

## User Impact

> <!-- Optional. Any impact on users this change may have. -->

Reviewer: Ideally, if done right, there should not be any user impact here. But we need to ensure that this is really the case. 

I think we need to explicitly cover:

1. Greenfield/new clusters deployed with OVN IC and Submariner 
2. Brownfield/upgrade scenario from existing OVN to OVN IC - here I am assuming there is going to be some downtime during upgrade?

Author: I thought of adding the section once Option1/Option2 is finalized.

# Submariner Enhancement for OVN Interconnect

<!-- Add link to issue/epic if available -->

## Summary

OVN CNI is moving to a new network topology powered by OVN Interconnect Feature. This allows independent
OVN deployments to be interconnected by OVN-managed GENEVE tunnels. Submariner does not work with these changes
out of the box and this proposal explains the changes required to support it.

## Proposal

With OVN Interconnect we can have two types of deployment

### Single Zone(Global Zone)

A single-zone deployment will have only one OVN database and a set of master nodes programming it. This is similar to the topology that we
use now. But it will have a Zone(global) assigned to it and will have a transit switch created for it. Though the transit switch is not

> involved in any packet forwarding in this topology. Though this setup is expected to work by default, the subnet that the transit switch

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
use now. But it will have a single `global` zone assigned to it with a transit switch which is not involved in any packet forwarding. Though this setup is expected to work by default, the subnet that the transit switch
```

> used overlaps with the subnet Submariner uses for the logical router. So we need to agree upon a non-overlapping subnet for Submariner.

Reviewer 3: Is the subnet used for transit switch hard-coded in OVN or is it configurable?

Author: It is not configurable right now , they are thinking of an option to make it configurable.

Reviewer: Just to confirm, this is referring to the 169.254.254.0 /24 subnet used today, correct?

Author: Yes that is right, now mentioned in the proposal.

Reviewer 3: >It is not configurable right now , they are thinking of an option to make it configurable.

But in Line 25 below, I see some configuration for transit-switch-port-ips where we can modify/specify the IPs. Is it the same transit switch CIDR or different one?

Author: The proposal is updated with a new design, marking this as resolved since things changed from the previous one.

### Multiple Zone

In a multiple-zone setup, we will have an OVN database and a set of master nodes for each zone. Transit switches connect between these
nodes. The OVN-Kubernetes services ensure that the necessary routes are added for pod and service reachability across nodes in different

> zones.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a multiple-zone setup, we will have an OVN database and a set of master nodes for each zone. Transit switches connect the zones. The OVN-Kubernetes services ensure that the necessary routes are added for pod and service reachability across nodes in different zones.
```

With the current architecture, Submariner adds routes only in the zone in which it is deployed. For example, if Submariner is deployed in
zone 1 it programs OVN db in zone 1. So only pods in zone 1 nodes will be able to talk to other clusters. Pods in zone 2 or zone 3 will not
be able to reach remote clusters connected via Submariner.

In this proposal, we explore two options to make Submariner work with OVN IC. More details about the upgrade and other design details shall
be added once agree on one of them.

### Option1: Add extra routes in existing Architecture

 This proposal makes minimal changes in the network plugin syncer to get OVN IC working. With this, we add new routes in the OVN cluster
router.

![UpdatedTopology](./images/submariner-ovn-ic.png)

These are the changes that will be needed

> 1) Network plugin Syncer needs to be Zone aware

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1) Network plugin Syncer needs to be `zone` aware
```

> 2) In the Zone where Submariner Gateway is present an extra route will be added to direct the traffic to remote CIDRS connected via

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2) In the `zone` where Submariner Gateway is present an extra route will be added to the `ovn-cluster-router` to direct the traffic to remote CIDRs connected via
```

> 2) In the Zone where Submariner Gateway is present an extra route will be added to direct the traffic to remote CIDRS connected via

Reviewer 3: Should we be adding routes or LRPs?

> submariner to the Submariner router. This is for the remote traffic coming from other zones.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
submariner via the Submariner router. This is to facilitate inter-cluster connectivity for traffic generated from other zones of the cluster.
```

> 3) In all the other zones a route will be added to direct the traffic to remote cluster CIDRS, connected via submariner, to the transit

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3) In all the other zones a route will be added to direct the traffic to remote cluster CIDRs, connected via submariner, to the transit
```

> switch that connects to the gateway node

Reviewer 3: Should we be adding a route to the transit switch or the ovn-cluster-router?

Author: I added it in 'ovn-cluster-router' as a part of POC, not sure if we can add IP-based routes in the switch, I will explore it.

#### Node Listener

A new node listener shall be added in NetworkPluginSyncer.

* The node listener shall be responsible for reading the node labels/annotations and identifying the zone in which the Submariner gateway is
deployed and the transit switch IP for it.

> * When a new node is added or a node joins a zone, the node listener needs to call the NetworkPluginSyncer handler to program the required

Reviewer 3: Lets elaborate when a new node is added to a zone, what kind of rules should the NPS program.

Author: Added the routes.

rules. It will also remove any existing stale rules.

> * When a node leaves no action is needed

Reviewer 3: What if the node was acting as a GW node?

Author: I mentioned it in the next sentence, I add non-gateway node in this one to be more specific.

Author: This section is modified.

* When the gateway nodes join a new zone, leaving the current one, all the switches will need to be reprogrammed as the transit switch IP
can change.

#### Network Plugin Syncer

Based on the info retrieved by the Node listener, the network plugin syncer can provision the Submariner infrastructure and program the
rules in the OVN database.

> * If no zone is detected(will be required for backward compatibility) or a global zone is detected the Submariner infrastructure and flows

Reviewer 3: How do we plan to detect the zone? Is it using the labels on the nodes or is it by querying the DB? or any other approach?

Author: It will be using annotation. OVN Kubernetes itself uses these labels once the appropriate annotations are added in a startup.

will remain as it is today.

* If a zone configuration is detected

1) In the gateway node zone a new routing rule can be added to forward the traffic destined for Submariner remote CIDRS

> to the Submariner router. This is required for the traffic coming from pods in a node that is in a different zone.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1) In the gateway node zone a new routing rule can be added to forward the traffic destined for Submariner remote CIDRs
to the Submariner router. This is required for the traffic coming from pods in a node that are in a different zone.
```

2) In the non-gateway zones a route will be added for the traffic destined for remote cluster CIDR to forward it to the gateway node
transit switch.

#### Pros of Option1

This makes the least changes than option 2 and can be delivered within the time frame we have.

#### Cons of Option1

It depends on OVN labels/annotations for programming the routes, which means a change in these would break Submariner. Also given the plans
to change the OVN -Submariner architecture this has to be reworked in future.

### Option2: Submariner OVN Re-architecture

> There is an effort to optimize Submariner OVN integration. As a part of this Submariner Router and related ports and join switch shall be

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure i understand this option. Are you saying that we should have a CR and the associated controller as part of OVN CNI? Will the OVNK team be okay to maintain the controller?

Author: This idea was proposed by the OVN team. The CR should be a generic one and not tied to Submariner.  Like providing a way to add a static route or router policy with the next hop and priority in a router. Also adding new ports as needed.

We will have to design this CRD and get it approved and implement the controller there.  For maintenance, we can add e2e there (hope it should be easy to add) and prevent things from failing. But still, we may have to spend some cycles on it.

# Submariner Enhancement for OVN Interconnect

<!-- Add link to issue/epic if available -->

## Summary

> OVN CNI is moving to a new network topology powered by OVN Interconnect Feature. This allows independent

Reviewer 3: _"This allows independent OVN deployments to be interconnected by OVN-managed GENEVE tunnels."_

Somehow, this gives me an impression that it allows us to connect independent **OCP** Clusters. Can we rephrase it?

OVN deployments to be interconnected by OVN-managed GENEVE tunnels. Submariner does not work with these changes
out of the box and this proposal explains the changes required to support it.

## Proposal

With OVN Interconnect we can have two types of deployment

### Single Zone(Global Zone)

A single-zone deployment will have only one OVN database and a set of master nodes programming it. This is similar to the topology that we
use now. But it will have a single `global` zone assigned to it with a transit switch which is not involved in any packet forwarding. Though
this setup is expected to work by default, the subnet that the transit switch
used overlaps with the subnet Submariner uses for the logical router. So we need to agree upon a non-overlapping subnet for Submariner.
In this proposal, I changed the Submariner router IP ranges to 244.254.254.0/8 for illustrative purposes.

```bash
    k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-id: "5"
    k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.1/16"]'
    k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global

> ```

Reviewer 3: It is not clear to me why we are capturing this info and what we intend to do with this info. Can you please clarify.

Author: Modified this section.

### Multiple Zone

> In a multiple-zone setup, we will have an OVN database and a set of master nodes for each zone. Transit switches connect the zones.

Reviewer 3: Is it mandatory to have a master node in each zone? In OCP, AFAICT we plan to use separate zone for each node, so if I understand it correctly, this should not be a requirement. Please clarify.

Author: yes each zone will have a master node.

The OVN-Kubernetes services ensure that the necessary routes are added for pod and service reachability across nodes in different zones.

```bash
    k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-id: "3"

>     k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.3/16"]'

Reviewer 3: The ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips are overlapping (line 40 below). Is this an IPaddress or a CIDR for the transit switch?

Author: yes , all transit swithces are same network and have a CIDR allocated to it.

# Submariner Enhancement for OVN Interconnect

<!-- Add link to issue/epic if available -->

## Summary

OVN CNI is moving to a new network topology powered by OVN Interconnect Feature. This allows independent OVN deployments to be interconnected
by OVN-managed GENEVE tunnels. Submariner does not work with these changes out of the box and this proposal explains the changes required to
support it.

## Proposal

With OVN Interconnect we can have two types of deployment

* Single Zone(Global Zone): A single-zone deployment will have only one OVN database and a set of master nodes programming it. This is similar
  to the topology that we use now. But it will have a single `global` zone assigned to it with a transit switch which is not involved in any
  packet forwarding. Though this setup is expected to work by default, the subnet that the transit switch used overlaps with the subnet
  Submariner uses for the logical router. In this proposal, we plan to remove the submariner router and the associated switches and this will
  not be a problem anymore. The below indicates node annotations in a single zone  OVN setup.

```bash
    annotations:

>       k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.1/16"]'

Reviewer 3: Is `169.254.0.1/16` the ipaddress of the transit switch and is same for all the nodes in the cluster?

Author: Every node that connects to another zone will have an IP from this CIDR.

      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global
    name: cluster1-worker

    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.1/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global
    name: cluster2-worker
```

> * Multiple Zone: In a multiple-zone setup, we will have an OVN database and a set of master nodes for each zone. Transit switches connect the

Reviewer 3: Is it mandatory that each zone should have a master node? What would happen if every node is acting as a separate zone?

Author: it is master pod per zone. updated.

  zones. The OVN-Kubernetes services ensure that the necessary routes are added for pod and service reachability across nodes in different
  zones.

```bash
    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.3/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global
    name: cluster1-worker

    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.5/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: az2
    name: cluster2-worker
```

With the current architecture, Submariner adds routes only in the zone in which it is deployed. For example, if Submariner is deployed in
zone 1 it programs OVN db in zone 1. So only pods in zone 1 nodes will be able to talk to other clusters. Pods in zone 2 or zone 3 will not
be able to reach remote clusters connected via Submariner.

### Route APIs

> As a part of this proposal, we are planning to add two new CRDs in Submariner

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As part of this proposal, we are planning to add two new CRDs in Submariner
```

#### SubmarinerGwRoute

> This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is added and there will be one CR per remote cluster. This crd have two fields

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is added and there will be one CR per remote cluster. This crd has two fields
```

> * NextHop - Specifies the next hop to reach the remote cluster.

Reviewer 3: Will the nextHop be pointing to the transit switch port ip associated with the respective zone or will it point to the public/private-ip of the remote cluster?

Author: it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0 , update the proposal.

> * RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of  remote CIDRS reachable via this cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of  remote CIDRs reachable via this cluster.
```

> * RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of  remote CIDRS reachable via this cluster.

Reviewer 3: What does "reachable via this cluster" mean?

Author: I mean to say the POD and Service CIDRs in that clusters

> 

Reviewer 3: I hope in a Globalnet deployment the RemoteCIDR will be pointing to the GlobalCIDR allocated to the cluster.

Author: Yes that is right.

> This CR will be used by the gateway pod to program OVN to send the traffic destined to remote clusters to the Submariner tunnel.

Reviewer 3: Is it the gateway pod or the OVN Network Plugin Syncer which runs as part of route-agent?

Author: I think we can remove the network -plugin-syncer pod as we now need seperate connections per zone and move ovn components to g/w and route agent.

Reviewer 3: We discussed during the meeting that this will be done by the RouteAgent pod running on the Active Gateway node. Please update the details.

Author: done.

``` go
type SubmarinerGwRouteList struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
  metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`

  Items []SubmarinerGwRoute `json:"items"`
  }

type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {
    //Specifies the next hop to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHop string `json:"nextHop"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

#### SubmarinerDefaultRoute

This CR will be created when a remote cluster is connected. When more remote clusters are added the Remote CIDR list will be updated.

* NextHop - Specifies the next hop.
* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of remote CIDRs reachable via this gateway.

This CR will be used by the Routeagent pods to

> * In non-g/w node - send the traffic to the g/w node , if the current node is in a different zone

Reviewer 3: What if the node is in the same zone?

* In g/w node - add route to send the traffic from other zones, destined to remote cluster to the submariner tunnel

``` go
type SubmarinerDefaultRouteList struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`

    Items []SubmarinerDefaultRoute `json:"items"`
}

type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {
    //Specifies the next hop to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHop string `json:"nextHop"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

## Design Details

> In this proposal, the plan is to remove the Submariner router and switches that it add to OVN db. The network-plugin-syncer shall be removed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this proposal, the plan is to remove the current `submariner-router` and switches that were added to the OVN db. The network-plugin-syncer shall be removed
```

and can be replaced by controllers in Submariner Gateway and Submariner RouteAgent. Since we have multiple ovn db to program, we need multiple

> connections. So it makes it easier to program the OVN datapath from Submariner Gateway and RouteAgent, than using a separate pod.

Reviewer 3: Is it "...multiple connections" or "multiple controllers"?

Author: I mean to say, multiple OVN db connections.

> connections. So it makes it easier to program the OVN datapath from Submariner Gateway and RouteAgent, than using a separate pod.

Reviewer 3: Does it mean that the controllers will be running even in a non-OVN deployment as well?

This new approach will work for both IC enabled and existing deployments. With this change we are planning to use the  ovn-k8s-mp0 interface
to reach the host networking stack and then the Submariner tunnel. This interface is used by OVN for host-networking traffic with in a cluster
and will be present in every node.

![UpdatedTopology](./images/submariner-ovn-ic.png)

### SubmarinerGatewayPod

The Submariner g/w pod will be responsible for creating the SubmarinerGWRoute CR. It will be used only for OVN CNI right now. For every
RemoteEndpointCreated event a SubmarinerGWRouteCR will be created. The nextHop will be the interface IP through which we can reach the cable
driver. In the case of OVN it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0 interface.

> The SubmarinerDefaultRoute CRD will also be created by Submariner Gateway. It will have the list of remote clusters connected to the gateway.

Reviewer 3: Instead of creating these CRs in Submariner Gateway, why not create them in the OVN Network plugin syncer?

Author: I thought of removing the network plugin syncer as we are not creating switches or routers and we need not have a CNI specific component.

The nexthop will be the transit switch IP of the G/W node. If the transit switch IP is missing this CRD will not be created, which means it is
a non-IC setup.

#### SubmarinerGWRouteCR Controller

This controller will be responsible for programming the OVN cluster router, and it shall be a part of Submariner g/w pod. When a SubmarinerGWRoute
CR is created  or modified the controller shall create or update a routing policy in OVN cluster router with a priority of 20000, and it should
redirect any traffic destined to remote CIDR to the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP.

```bash
_uuid               : 0459f009-3603-47ac-8ee7-9d958540ed31
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}

> ip_prefix           : "242.1.0.0/16"

Reviewer 3: It would be good if you use the same IP CIDRs that you used in the diagram to make it easy for users to follow.

Author: Done.

nexthop             : "10.244.1.2"
options             : {}
output_port         : []
policy              : []
route_table         : ""
```

#### SubmarinerRouteAgentPod

The Routeagent will have a new controller added to it

##### SubmarinerDefaultRouteController

This controller will run in every in route agent. This controller connects to the OVN DB. When a SubmarinerDefaultRoute CR is created

* non-gateway node : it updates the DB with a router policy with a priority 20000 to send the traffic to the remote cluster via next hop
  mentioned, which is the transit switch IP to the g/w node. Before adding the route it checks if a route exists, if so it skips adding the
  route again. This is required to prevent duplicate update since there can be more than one node in each zone and hence more than one
  Routeagent.

```bash
_uuid               : 22db3005-64c5-4e32-aeb0-642423c30742
action              : reroute
external_ids        : {}

> match               : "ip4.dst==242.1.0.0/16"

Reviewer 3: same

Author: Done.

nexthop             : []
nexthops            : ["169.254.0.1"]
options             : {"external_ids:{submariner"="true}"}
priority            : 20000
```

* gateway node/same zone node : In the gateway node route agent adds a route, if it does not exist, to send the traffic coming from other
  zones which is destined to remote cluster IP range to the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP. It checks if the rule already exists to prevent duplicate

>   update.

Reviewer 3: Could this lead to any race conditions?

Author: This will be add operation and we can ignore an already present error if it is thrown.

```bash
_uuid               : d55185d8-3732-45c1-ae90-4a7f8cd191f7
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}

> ip_prefix           : "242.1.0.0/16"

Reviewer 3: same

Author: Done.

nexthop             : "10.244.1.2"
options             : {}
output_port         : []
policy              : []
route_table         : ""
```

### Backward Compatibility

With this architecture, we are removing the logical switches and routers that Submariner creates. During migration, we will need to delete

> these components and the routes that network-plugin-syncer installed. After that, the new controllers shall install the updated routes.

Reviewer 3: What about the impact to the installers - like the impact on ovn-networkplugin-syncer component etc

Author: Yes we need to remove the deployment from the operator. Added the description.

be able to reach remote clusters connected via Submariner.

### Route APIs

As part of this proposal, we are planning to add two new CRDs in Submariner

#### SubmarinerGwRoute

This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is added and there will be one CR per remote cluster. This crd has two fields

* NextHop - Specifies the next hop to reach the remote cluster.
* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of  remote CIDRs reachable via this cluster, in this case it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0
interface.

This CR will be used by the gateway pod to program OVN to send the traffic destined to remote clusters to the Submariner tunnel.

``` go
type SubmarinerGwRouteList struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
  metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`

  Items []SubmarinerGwRoute `json:"items"`
  }

type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {
    //Specifies the next hop to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHop string `json:"nextHop"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

#### SubmarinerDefaultRoute

> This CR will be created when a remote cluster is connected. When more remote clusters are added the Remote CIDR list will be updated.

Reviewer 3: Can we use endpoints itself instead of cluster CRDs?

Author: Done.

# Submariner Enhancement for OVN Interconnect

<!-- Add link to issue/epic if available -->

## Summary

OVN CNI is moving to a new network topology powered by OVN Interconnect Feature. This allows independent OVN deployments to be interconnected

> by OVN-managed GENEVE tunnels. Submariner does not work with these changes out of the box and this proposal explains the changes required to

Reviewer 4: Clarify if this is within a single cluster or not. Independent OVN deployments can also mean multiple clusters. From Submariner perspective it is crucial disctinction.

Author: Done.

support it.

## Proposal

> With OVN Interconnect we can have two types of deployment

Reviewer 4: Would be good to clarify somewhere that which type of zone deployment is used isn't within scope of Submariner and is [I think] decided at time of deploying OpenShift.

Author: we support both, added details in proposal.

* Single Zone(Global Zone): A single-zone deployment will have only one OVN database and a set of master nodes programming it. This is similar
  to the topology that we use now. But it will have a single `global` zone assigned to it with a transit switch which is not involved in any

>   packet forwarding. Though this setup is expected to work by default, the subnet that the transit switch used overlaps with the subnet

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  packet forwarding. Though this setup is expected to work by default, the subnet that the transit switch uses overlaps with the subnet
```

Reviewer 4: Mention the CIDR itself too, it help relate it to the annotation used in next section.

Author: done.

>   Submariner uses for the logical router. In this proposal, we plan to remove the submariner router and the associated switches and this will

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Submariner uses for the logical router. In this proposal, we plan to remove the submariner logical router and the associated switches and this will
```

Author: done.

>   not be a problem anymore. The below indicates node annotations in a single zone  OVN setup.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  not be a problem anymore.
  
  The below indicates node annotations in a single zone  OVN setup.
```
Make it clear that these are existing annotations to distinguish it from any annotations submariner may or may not need to add.

Author: added a info that this annotation is added by ovn.

```bash
    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.1/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global
    name: cluster1-worker

    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.1/16"]'

>       k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global

Reviewer 3: Is the name `global` having any significance or is it just some unique name that is same for all the cluster nodes?

Author: it is just a unique name , this first instance is named as global and then 1,2,3 and so on.

    name: cluster2-worker
```

> * Multiple Zone: In a multiple-zone setup, we will have an OVN database and a master pod for each zone. Transit switches connect the

Reviewer 3: Please elaborate what "master pod" means in this context?

Author: added 'OVN' before master , to make it clear

  zones. The OVN-Kubernetes services ensure that the necessary routes are added for pod and service reachability across nodes in different
  zones.

```bash
    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.3/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global
    name: cluster1-worker

    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.5/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: az2
    name: cluster2-worker
```

With the current architecture, Submariner adds routes only in the zone in which it is deployed. For example, if Submariner is deployed in
zone 1 it programs OVN db in zone 1. So only pods in zone 1 nodes will be able to talk to other clusters. Pods in zone 2 or zone 3 will not
be able to reach remote clusters connected via Submariner.

### Route APIs

> As part of this proposal, we are planning to add two new CRDs in Submariner

Reviewer 4: It explains what CR will do but not why. Why do we need CR, why couldn't we directly program OVN rules. Are there plans for OVN to provide its own generic CRs for other components also to use?

Author: Added the details, aim is to decouple OVN dataplane programming and move it OVN repo in future.

#### SubmarinerGwRoute

This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is added and there will be one CR per remote cluster. This crd has two fields

* NextHop - Specifies the next hop to reach the remote cluster.

> * RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of  remote CIDRs reachable via this cluster, in this case it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0

Reviewer 3: Why does the RemoteCIDR point to the IP of `ovn-k9s-mp0`. Should this actually apply to the NextHop field?

Author: oh ya it is a mistake . corrected it.

> * RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of  remote CIDRs reachable via this cluster, in this case it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0

Reviewer 4: Would be good to give a brief about OVN IC design first. `ovn-k9s-mp0` interface is mentioned but it is not clear what is this interface for and who creates it. Mainly from submariner perspective, it needs to be clear if submariner creates it or OCP at time of installation.

Author: It is an interface existing in ovn for host networking, not related to Interconnect. Added the purpose of the interface.

interface.

This CR will be used by the gateway pod to program OVN to send the traffic destined to remote clusters to the Submariner tunnel.

``` go
type SubmarinerGwRouteList struct {
  metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
  metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`

  Items []SubmarinerGwRoute `json:"items"`
  }

> type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {

Reviewer 3: I think this should be `SubmarinerGwRoute`

Author: Done.

    //Specifies the next hop to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHop string `json:"nextHop"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

#### SubmarinerNonGWRoute

> This CR will be created when a remote cluster is connected. When more remote endpoints are added the Remote CIDR list will be updated.

Reviewer 3: Instead of "remote cluster" events, can we use "remote endpoint" events?

* NextHop - Specifies the next hop.
* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of remote CIDRs reachable via this gateway.

> This CR will be used by the Routeagent pods to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This CR will be used by the Routeagent pods running on the non-Gateway nodes to
```

Author: Done.

> * In non-g/w node - send the traffic to the g/w node , if the current node is in a different zone

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* If the route-agent pod is not in the same zone as Gateway node zone, send the traffic to the g/w node zone.
```

Reviewer 4: Earlier it is mentioned submariner will only route within same zone, that is other zones can't reach remote clusters. What is the use case here? Pods in other zones trying to reach remote cluster, or trying to reach a pod in submariner zone?

Author: Pods in other zones trying to reach the remote cluster, that traffic needs to be send a via the gateway node, which may be in same zone or different zone.

> * In g/w node - add route to send the traffic from other zones, destined to remote cluster to the submariner tunnel

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* If the route-agent pod is in the same zone as Gateway node zone, send the traffic coming from other zones, destined to remote cluster to the submariner tunnel on the Gateway node.
```

``` go
type SubmarinerNonGWRouteList struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`

    Items []SubmarinerNonGWRoute `json:"items"`
}

> type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {

Reviewer 3: Please correct it

Author: Done.

Reviewer 3: I see that the name of this is still `SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec` and not `SubmarinerNonGWRouteSpec`.
You marked it as resolved. Was it by accident or am I missing something?

Author: Sorry, I think this got missed some how , corrected now.

    //Specifies the next hop to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHop string `json:"nextHop"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

## Design Details

> In this proposal, the plan is to remove the current `submariner-router` and switches that were added to the OVN db. The network-plugin-syncer

Reviewer 4: Would it be better to use another container in these pods than controller within same container?

Author: This would make it similar to other CNI, where route-agent handles the CNI specific datapath rules.

> shall be removed  and can be replaced by controllers in Submariner Gateway and Submariner RouteAgent. Since we have multiple ovn db to

Reviewer 3: We decided to use Route-agent pods and not the Submariner Gateway right?

Author: Done. I hope I did it all the places now.

program, we need multiple connections. So it makes it easier to program the OVN datapath from Submariner Gateway and RouteAgent, than using
a separate pod. This new approach will work for both IC enabled and existing deployments. With this change we are planning to use the
ovn-k8s-mp0 interface to reach the host networking stack and then the Submariner tunnel. This interface is used by OVN for host-networking
traffic with in a cluster and will be present in every node.

![UpdatedTopology](./images/submariner-ovn-ic.png)

> ### SubmarinerRouteAgentPod

Reviewer 3: Please fix it.

The Submariner Route-agent pod will be responsible for creating the SubmarinerGWRoute CR. It will be used only for OVN CNI right now. For every
RemoteEndpointCreated event a SubmarinerGWRouteCR will be created. The nextHop will be the interface IP through which we can reach the cable
driver. In the case of OVN it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0 interface.

> The SubmarinerDefaultRoute CRD will also be created by Submariner Route-agent. It will have the list of remote clusters connected to the gateway.

Reviewer 3: same

Author: Done.

The nexthop will be the transit switch IP of the G/W node. If the transit switch IP is missing this CRD will not be created, which means it is
a non-IC setup.

The Routeagent will have these controllers added to it

#### SubmarinerGWRouteCR Controller

This controller will be responsible for programming the OVN cluster router, it will react only in a g/w node. When a SubmarinerGWRoute
CR is created or modified the controller shall create or update a routing policy in OVN cluster router with a priority of 20000, and it should
redirect any traffic destined to remote CIDR to the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP.

```bash
_uuid               : 0459f009-3603-47ac-8ee7-9d958540ed31
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}
ip_prefix           : "10.132.0.0/16"
nexthop             : "10.244.1.2"
options             : {}
output_port         : []
policy              : []
route_table         : ""
```

##### SubmarinerNonGWRouteController

> This controller will run in every in route agent. This controller connects to the OVN DB. When a SubmarinerDefaultRoute CR is created

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This controller will run in every route agent pod. This controller connects to the OVN DB. When a SubmarinerDefaultRoute CR is created
```

Author: Done.

  route again. This is required to prevent duplicate update since there can be more than one node in each zone and hence more than one
  Routeagent.

```bash
_uuid               : 22db3005-64c5-4e32-aeb0-642423c30742
action              : reroute
external_ids        : {}
match               : "ip4.dst==10.132.0.0/16"
nexthop             : []
nexthops            : ["169.254.0.1"]
options             : {"external_ids:{submariner"="true}"}
priority            : 20000
```

* gateway node/same zone node : In the gateway node route agent adds a route, if it does not exist, to send the traffic coming from other
  zones which is destined to remote cluster IP range to the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP. It checks if the rule already exists to prevent duplicate
  update.

```bash
_uuid               : d55185d8-3732-45c1-ae90-4a7f8cd191f7
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}
ip_prefix           : "10.132.0.0/16"
nexthop             : "10.244.1.2"
options             : {}
output_port         : []
policy              : []
route_table         : ""
```

### Backward Compatibility

> With this architecture, we are removing the logical switches and routers that Submariner creates. During migration, we will need to delete

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With this architecture, we are removing the logical switches and routers that Submariner created in the existing implementation. During migration, we will need to delete
```

Author: Done.

> With this architecture, we are removing the logical switches and routers that Submariner creates. During migration, we will need to delete

Reviewer 4: Also, it isn't just OVN version and IC being updated, but also new Submariner CRs. New datapath won't be available till submariner version upgrades and installs the new CRs, even if IC is already available.

Better to add a separate section on `Upgradability` that details how upgrades will be, or should be handled. Even if nothing to do in code, it should serve as base for documentation.

Author: This section can be revisited when we have a clear plan for upgrades.

these components and the routes that network-plugin-syncer installed. After that, the new controllers shall install the updated routes. The
operator needs to be updated as well, not to create a network-plugin-syncer pods and remove any existing deployments.

#### Open issues

1. The update from older version of Submariner to a newer version will create  a datapath downtime.

> 2. When multiple clusters are updated we need to check if one cluster can be done at a time.

Reviewer 4: Should also mention that cluster being updated will be unreachable from other clusters till all nodes are upgraded.

Author: Added a note.

> 3. When Kubernetes cluster is update to a version that have IC enabled, there could be a datapath downtime till the

Reviewer 4: Won't there also be a donwtime in datapath to remote clusters as non-gw nodes are updated while gw node not updated, or vice-versa. Only nodes on same version as GW node will be able to talk to remote clusters, right?

Author: yes the datapath will not be fully functional until all the nodes are updated.

Submariner g/w node is updated. Since the other nodes need the transit switch IP which will be available only when
the g/w node is updated.

> ### Alternatives

Reviewer 4: Was there an alternative considered to not use the two new CRs?

Author: Yes the initial design proposal was with CR and after reviews we moved to this one.

out of the box and this proposal explains the changes required to support it.

## Proposal

With OVN Interconnect we can have two types of deployment

* Single Zone(Global Zone): A single-zone deployment will have only one OVN database and a set of master nodes programming it. This is similar
  to the topology that we use now. But it will have a single `global` zone assigned to it with a transit switch which is not involved in any
  packet forwarding. Though this setup is expected to work by default, the subnet that the transit switch uses overlaps with the subnet
  Submariner uses for the logical router. In this proposal, we plan to remove the submariner logical router and the associated switches and
  this will not be a problem anymore.

  The below indicates node annotations in a single zone OVN setup and is added by OVN.

```bash
    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.1/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global
    name: cluster1-worker

    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.1/16"]'

>       k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global

Reviewer 2: Is changing node OVN zone is supported use case?

Author: yes it can change. We will have to handle it , if the g/w node zone changes. I think we should care about change in the transit switch IP change if it happens.

    name: cluster2-worker
```

* Multiple Zone: In a multiple-zone setup, we will have an OVN database and an OVN master pod for each zone. Transit switches connect the
  zones. The OVN-Kubernetes services ensure that the necessary routes are added for pod and service reachability across nodes in different
  zones.

```bash
    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.3/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global
    name: cluster1-worker

    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.5/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: az2
    name: cluster2-worker
```

With the current architecture, Submariner adds routes only in the zone in which it is deployed. For example, if Submariner is deployed in
zone 1 it programs OVN db in zone 1. So only pods in zone 1 nodes will be able to talk to other clusters. Pods in zone 2 or zone 3 will not

> be able to reach remote clusters connected via Submariner. With these changes we plan to support both the modes and cluster where interconnect

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
be able to reach remote clusters connected via Submariner. 

As part of the proposal, we plan to support both the modes and OVN cluster deployments where interconnect
```

is not enabled as well.

> ### Route APIs

Reviewer 2: Does the suggested decoupling Submariner Route API  fit also to other CNIs ?

Do we plan to use this approach also for other CNIs ?

Author: It do fit for other CNIs , but it would be changed for other CNI as a part of this change.

Reviewer 2: You meant 'but it wouldn't be changed for other CNI as a part of this change.' , right ?

As part of this proposal, we are planning to add two new CRDs in Submariner. The plan is to decouple OVN dataplane programming so that this
can be moved to OVN, when OVN provides a way to add custom routes. We can propose this CRD or consume the CRD that they provide at a later
point of time.

#### SubmarinerGwRoute

This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is added and there will be one CR per remote cluster. This crd has two fields

* NextHop - Specifies the next hop to reach the remote cluster, in this case it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0
  interface, the interface used by OVN for host networking.
* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of  remote CIDRs reachable via this cluster.

> This CR will be used by the route agent pod running on the non-Gateway nodes to program OVN to send the traffic destined to

Reviewer 3: Should this be "Gateway node"? (instead of non-Gateway node)

Also, as we have only one Active Gateway node at a time even if there are multiple nodes labelled as Gws, lets use node instead of nodes (assuming it was Gateway node).

```suggestion
This CR will be used by the route agent pod running on the non-Gateway node to program OVN to send the traffic destined to
```

remote clusters via the Submariner tunnel.

``` go
type SubmarinerGwRoute struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec `json:"submarinerRoutePolicySpec"`
}

type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {
    //Specifies the next hop to reach the remote CIDRs

>     NextHop string `json:"nextHop"`

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't 'NextHop' be a list? to enable multiple routes to the destination (ECMP) in the future?

Author: may be  we can change it . @sridhargaddam Do you agree?

Reviewer 3: If I understand correctly, this is for the `SubmarinerGwRoute` CR. The nextHop here points to the IPaddress on `ovn-k8s-mp0` of the GW node. Assuming that we support Active/Active HA in future, can we use the same CR and configure multiple NextHops which point to `ovn-k8s-mp0` IPs of different GW nodes (and should they be all in the same Zone or can we even use the IPs if they are in different zone)?

Author: yes that is right , if we want a next hop for a set of remote CIDRS , it can be achieved with this CR.

Reviewer 2: Not sure that I fully understand, so, you suggest that for Active/Active  we should create 2 SubmarinerGwRoute CRs?

Author: made it an array.

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

#### SubmarinerNonGWRoute

This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is created. When more remote endpoints are added the Remote CIDR list will be updated.

* NextHop - Specifies the next hop.
* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of remote CIDRs reachable via this gateway.

This CR will be used by the Routeagent pods running on the non-Gateway nodes to

* In non-g/w node - If the route-agent pod is not in the same zone as Gateway node zone, send the traffic to the g/w node zone.
* In g/w node - add route to send the traffic from other zones, destined to remote cluster to the submariner tunnel

``` go

> type SubmarinerNonGWRoute struct {

Reviewer 2: Why do we need two different CRDs (SubmarinerNonGWRoute, SubmarinerGwRoute)? it seems that the content is identical for both of them.
Maybe we can add 'type' field?

Author: I thought having two controller handling it would be easier , but I am open to change 

@sridhargaddam  any thoughts?

Reviewer 3: What will be the value of `NextHop` in this CR and will there not be a difference in this value compared to the other CR (i.e., SubmarinerGwRoute). Can you please clarify?

Author: the values will be different, in a SubmarinerNonGWRoute it points to transit switch IP and in SubmarinerGwRoute it points ovn-k8s-mp0 IP. The cluster are CIDRs will be the remote pod and service CIDRs.

The thing common between them is , it has same fields.

Author: After the discussion decided to use same CRD.

}

type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {
    //Specifies the next hop to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHop string `json:"nextHop"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

## Design Details

In this proposal, the plan is to remove the current `submariner-router` and switches that were added to the OVN db. The network-plugin-syncer
shall be removed  and can be replaced by controllers in and Submariner RouteAgent. Since we have multiple ovn db to
program, we need multiple connections. So it makes it easier to program the OVN datapath from RouteAgent, than using
a separate pod. This new approach will work for both IC enabled and existing deployments. With this change we are planning to use the
ovn-k8s-mp0 interface to reach the host networking stack and then the Submariner tunnel. This interface is used by OVN for host-networking
traffic with in a cluster and will be present in every node.

![UpdatedTopology](./images/submariner-ovn-ic.png)

### SubmarinerRouteAgentPod

The Submariner Route-agent pod will be responsible for creating the SubmarinerGWRoute CR. It will be used only for OVN CNI right now. For every

> RemoteEndpointCreated event a SubmarinerGWRouteCR will be created. The nextHop will be the interface IP through which we can reach the cable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
RemoteEndpointCreated event a SubmarinerGWRoute CR will be created. The nextHop will be the interface IP through which we can reach the cable
```

driver. In the case of OVN it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0 interface.

> The SubmarinerDefaultRoute CRD will also be created by Submariner Route-agent. It will have the list of remote endpoints connected to the gateway.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The SubmarinerNonGWRoute CRD will also be created by Submariner Route-agent. It will have the list of remote endpoints connected to the gateway.
```

> The SubmarinerDefaultRoute CRD will also be created by Submariner Route-agent. It will have the list of remote endpoints connected to the gateway.

Reviewer 2: 'SubmarinerDefaultRoute'  CRD?????

Author: it was the old name given for the CRD , fixed it.

The nexthop will be the transit switch IP of the G/W node. If the transit switch IP is missing this CRD will not be created, which means it is
a non-IC setup.

> The Routeagent will have these controllers added to it

Reviewer 3: It is not clear which Route Agent does it, as we have an instance of RouteAgent running on every node.

Author: Updated with details.

> #### SubmarinerGWRouteCR Controller

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### SubmarinerGWRoute CR Controller
```

This controller will be responsible for programming the OVN cluster router, it will react only in a g/w node. When a SubmarinerGWRoute
CR is created or modified the controller shall create or update a routing policy in OVN cluster router with a priority of 20000, and it should
redirect any traffic destined to remote CIDR to the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP.

```bash
_uuid               : 0459f009-3603-47ac-8ee7-9d958540ed31
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}
ip_prefix           : "10.132.0.0/16"
nexthop             : "10.244.1.2"
options             : {}
output_port         : []
policy              : []
route_table         : ""
```

> ##### SubmarinerNonGWRouteController

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### SubmarinerNonGWRoute Controller
```

> This controller will run in every route agent pod. This controller connects to the OVN DB. When a SubmarinerDefaultRoute CR is created

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This controller will run in every route agent pod. This controller connects to the OVN DB. When a SubmarinerNonGWRoute CR is created
```

> * non-gateway node : it updates the DB with a router policy with a priority 20000 to send the traffic to the remote cluster via next hop

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* non-gateway node : it updates the ovn-cluster-route with a router policy using a priority of 20000 to send the traffic to the remote cluster via next hop
```

  mentioned, which is the transit switch IP to the g/w node. Before adding the route it checks if a route exists, if so it skips adding the
  route again. This is required to prevent duplicate update since there can be more than one node in each zone and hence more than one
  Routeagent.

```bash
_uuid               : 22db3005-64c5-4e32-aeb0-642423c30742
action              : reroute
external_ids        : {}
match               : "ip4.dst==10.132.0.0/16"
nexthop             : []
nexthops            : ["169.254.0.1"]
options             : {"external_ids:{submariner"="true}"}
priority            : 20000
```

> * gateway node/same zone node : In the gateway node route agent adds a route, if it does not exist, to send the traffic coming from other
>   zones which is destined to remote cluster IP range to the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP. It checks if the rule already exists to prevent duplicate
>   update.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* gateway node/same zone node : Route agent running on the Gateway node, programs a route in the ovn-cluster-router, to route the traffic coming from other zones destined to remote cluster IP range via the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP. It checks if the rule already exists to prevent duplicate update.
```

```bash
_uuid               : d55185d8-3732-45c1-ae90-4a7f8cd191f7
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}
ip_prefix           : "10.132.0.0/16"
nexthop             : "10.244.1.2"
options             : {}
output_port         : []
policy              : []
route_table         : ""
```

### Backward Compatibility

With this architecture, we are removing the logical switches and routers that Submariner created in the existing implementation.
During migration, we will need to delete these components and the routes that network-plugin-syncer installed. After that,
the new controllers shall install the updated routes. The operator needs to be updated as well, not to create a
network-plugin-syncer pods and remove any existing deployments.

#### Open issues

1. The update from older version of Submariner to a newer version will create  a datapath downtime.
2. When multiple clusters are updated we need to check if one cluster can be done at a time. The cluster will be down
until all the nodes are updated.

> 3. When Kubernetes cluster is update to a version that have IC enabled, there could be a datapath downtime till the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. When Kubernetes cluster is updated to a version that has IC enabled, there could be a datapath downtime till the
```

  zones.

```bash
    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.3/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global
    name: cluster1-worker

    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.5/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: az2
    name: cluster2-worker
```

With the current architecture, Submariner adds routes only in the zone in which it is deployed. For example, if Submariner is deployed in
zone 1 it programs OVN db in zone 1. So only pods in zone 1 nodes will be able to talk to other clusters. Pods in zone 2 or zone 3 will not
be able to reach remote clusters connected via Submariner.

As part of the proposal, we plan to support both the modes and OVN cluster deployments where interconnect
is not enabled as well.

### Route APIs

As part of this proposal, we are planning to add two new CRDs in Submariner. The plan is to decouple OVN dataplane programming so that this
can be moved to OVN, when OVN provides a way to add custom routes. We can propose this CRD or consume the CRD that they provide at a later
point of time.

> #### SubmarinerGwRoute

Reviewer 2: Hmm, maybe I'm missing something here, still not sure that I fully understand the role of SubmarinerGwRoute CRD and the expected flow,

Can you elaborate which componenet is responsible to create SubmarinerGwRoute and upon which triggers ?

Can you explain what is the expected number of SubmarinerGwRoute and content for the example setup attached in the design details section [1] ?

[1]
https://github.com/submariner-io/enhancements/blob/0383b8644f2fb9cfa43521cc428a65673a6d849b/submariner/OVN-Interconnect.md#design-details

Author: Added in route API section for both CRs

> This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is added and there will be one CR per remote cluster. This crd has two fields

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is added and there will be one CR per remote cluster. This CRD has two fields
```

* NextHops - Specifies the list of next hop to reach the remote cluster, in this case it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0
  interface, the interface used by OVN for host networking.
* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of  remote CIDRs reachable via this cluster.

> This CR will be used by the route agent pod running on the non-Gateway node to program OVN to send the traffic destined to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This CR will be used by the route agent pod running on the active Gateway node to program OVN to send the traffic destined to
```

remote clusters via the Submariner tunnel.

``` go

> type SubmarinerGwRoute struct {

Reviewer 2: I think that one of the added value of Route API is  the ability to read configuration status from CR . Do we plan to add status section to the new proposed CRDs ?

Author: There will not be any status field for now.

    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec `json:"submarinerRoutePolicySpec"`
}

type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {
    //Specifies the list of next hops to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHops []string `json:"nextHops"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

#### SubmarinerNonGWRoute

> This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is created and there will be one created endpoint.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't it be one CR per remote endpoint?

Author: done

* NextHops - Specifies the list of next hops. In this case it will be the transit switch IP.
* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of remote CIDRs reachable via this gateway.

> This CR will be used by the RouteAgent pods running on the non-Gateway nodes to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This CR will be used by the RouteAgent pods running on the non-active Gateway nodes to
```

> This CR will be used by the RouteAgent pods running on the non-Gateway nodes to

Reviewer 3: non-active Gateway might imply that its only for nodes labelled as Gateway but not active. We usually use non-Gateway node to imply any node that is not acting as the active Gateway node.

* In non-g/w node - If the route-agent pod is not in the same zone as Gateway node zone, send the traffic to the g/w node zone.

> * In g/w node - add route to send the traffic from other zones, destined to remote cluster to the submariner tunnel

Reviewer 2: Hmm, you wrote above that 
"
This CR will be used by the RouteAgent pods running on the non-Gateway nodes to " , do we need this part?

Author: removed

``` go
type SubmarinerNonGWRoute struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec `json:"submarinerRoutePolicySpec"`
}

type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {
    //Specifies the list of next hops to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHops []string `json:"nextHops"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

> ## Design Details

Reviewer 2: I think we should also cover GW node switchover under Design Details (e.g: SM with 2 GW HA  setup whereas GW1 node is assigned to OVN-Zone1 and GW2  node is assigned to OVN-Zone2. )

Author: Done.

In this proposal, the plan is to remove the current `submariner-router` and switches that were added to the OVN db. The network-plugin-syncer
shall be removed  and can be replaced by controllers in and Submariner RouteAgent. Since we have multiple ovn db to
program, we need multiple connections. So it makes it easier to program the OVN datapath from RouteAgent, than using
a separate pod. This new approach will work for both IC enabled and existing deployments. With this change we are planning to use the
ovn-k8s-mp0 interface to reach the host networking stack and then the Submariner tunnel. This interface is used by OVN for host-networking
traffic with in a cluster and will be present in every node.

![UpdatedTopology](./images/submariner-ovn-ic.png)

### SubmarinerRouteAgentPod

> The Submariner Route-agent pod will be responsible for creating the SubmarinerGWRoute CR. It will be used only for OVN CNI. For every

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Submariner Route-agent pod running on the active gateway node will be responsible for creating the SubmarinerGWRoute CRs. It will be used only for OVN CNI. For every
```

Author: Done.

RemoteEndpointCreated event a SubmarinerGWRoute CR will be created. The nextHop will be the interface IP through which we can reach the cable
driver. In the case of OVN it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0 interface.

> The SubmarinerNonGWRoute CRD will also be created by Submariner Route-agent. It will have the list of remote endpoints connected to the gateway.

Reviewer 2: Don't you think that it makes sense to create SubmarinerNonGWRoute CR per remote endpoint? like SubmarinerGWRoute CRs

Author: Added details.

The nexthop will be the transit switch IP of the G/W node. If the transit switch IP is missing this CRD will not be created, which means it is
a non-IC setup.

The Routeagent  will have these controllers added to it and the one running in gateway node responds to the CRUD operations.

> #### SubmarinerGWRoute CR Controller

Reviewer 2: Do we create the same route [1]  in GW node  for  SubmarinerGWRoute and SubmarinerNonGWRoute CRs ? 

[1] 
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}
ip_prefix           : "10.132.0.0/16"
nexthop             : "10.244.1.2"
options             : {}
output_port         : []
policy              : []
route_table         : ""

Author: As discussed , a route will be created in ovn-cluster-router of g/w node zone  in response SubmarinerGWRoute and ins response to SubmarinerNonGWRoute a route will be created in ovn-cluster-router of non-g/w zone.

> The RouteAgent  will have these controllers added to it and the one running in gateway node responds to the CRUD operations.

Reviewer 2: Can you elaborate ?  what do you mean by 
"and the one running in gateway node responds to the CRUD operations" ?

CRUD of which resource/s?

> This controller will be responsible for programming the OVN cluster router, it will react only in a g/w node. When a SubmarinerGWRoute

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This controller will be responsible for programming the OVN cluster router, it will react only in the active g/w node. When a SubmarinerGWRoute
```

Author: Done.

CR is created or modified the controller shall create or update a routing policy in OVN cluster router with a priority of 20000, and it should
redirect any traffic destined to remote CIDR to the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP.

```bash
_uuid               : 0459f009-3603-47ac-8ee7-9d958540ed31
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}
ip_prefix           : "10.132.0.0/16"

> nexthop             : "10.244.1.2"

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't the nexthop  set to IP address  ovn-k8s-mp0 interface (10.1.1.2) ?

Author: corrected.

options             : {}
output_port         : []
policy              : []
route_table         : ""
```

#### SubmarinerNonGWRoute Controller

This controller will run in every route agent pod. This controller connects to the OVN DB. When a SubmarinerNonGWRoute CR is created

* non-gateway node : it updates the ovn-cluster-route with a router policy using a priority of 20000 to send the traffic to
  the remote cluster via next hop mentioned, which is the transit switch IP to the g/w node. Before adding the route it checks if
  a route exists, if so it skips adding the route again. This is required to prevent duplicate update since there can be more than
  one node in each zone and hence more than one Routeagent.

```bash
_uuid               : 22db3005-64c5-4e32-aeb0-642423c30742
action              : reroute
external_ids        : {}
match               : "ip4.dst==10.132.0.0/16"
nexthop             : []
nexthops            : ["169.254.0.1"]
options             : {"external_ids:{submariner"="true}"}
priority            : 20000
```

> * gateway node/same zone node : Route agent running on the Gateway node, programs a route in the ovn-cluster-router, to route

Reviewer 2: Why do we need this part ?
Isn't it the SubmarinerGWRoute Controller's responsibility?

I thought that 
SubmarinerGWRoute controller will handle events only on active-GW node and it should be responsible to configure all needed routing rules on the OVN zone that active GW node is assigned to

SubmarinerNonGWRoute controller will handle events only on NON active-GW nodes and it should be responsible to configure routing rules for forwarding traffic to GW OVN zone. so, for non-GW nodes that assigned to same OVN zone as active GW node , no routing rules should be configured.

Author: Changed.

  the traffic coming from other zones destined to remote cluster IP range via the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP. It checks if the
  rule already exists to prevent duplicate update.

```bash
_uuid               : d55185d8-3732-45c1-ae90-4a7f8cd191f7
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}
ip_prefix           : "10.132.0.0/16"

> nexthop             : "10.244.1.2"

Reviewer 2: Is it the correct nexthop value ?

Author: Corrected.

out of the box and this proposal explains the changes required to support it.

## Proposal

With OVN Interconnect we can have two types of deployment

* Single Zone(Global Zone): A single-zone deployment will have only one OVN database and a set of master nodes programming it. This is similar
  to the topology that we use now. But it will have a single `global` zone assigned to it with a transit switch which is not involved in any
  packet forwarding. Though this setup is expected to work by default, the subnet that the transit switch uses overlaps with the subnet
  Submariner uses for the logical router. In this proposal, we plan to remove the submariner logical router and the associated switches and
  this will not be a problem anymore.

  The below indicates node annotations in a single zone OVN setup and is added by OVN.

```bash
    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.1/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global
    name: cluster1-worker

    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.1/16"]'

>       k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global

Reviewer 3: When I deployed a OVN KIND cluster with IC enabled, I see the following annotations.

```
k8s.ovn.org/node-transit-switch-port-ifaddr: {"ipv4":"168.254.0.3/16"}                                                                                                       
k8s.ovn.org/zone-name: ovn-worker 
```

So, I looked at the code and see the above mentioned annotations.
https://github.com/ovn-org/ovn-kubernetes/blob/346360757b89b689d2ca2cb090698be7d0be1419/go-controller/pkg/util/node_annotations.go#L89

Which is the right annotation?

Author: this should be the latest, I took those from a PR which was under review.

    name: cluster2-worker
```

* Multiple Zone: In a multiple-zone setup, we will have an OVN database and an OVN master pod for each zone. Transit switches connect the
  zones. The OVN-Kubernetes services ensure that the necessary routes are added for pod and service reachability across nodes in different
  zones.

```bash
    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.3/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: global
    name: cluster1-worker

    annotations:
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-node-transit-switch-port-ips: '["169.254.0.5/16"]'
      k8s.ovn.org/ovn-zone: az2
    name: cluster2-worker
```

> With the current architecture, Submariner adds routes only in the zone in which it is deployed. For example, if Submariner is deployed in

Reviewer 3: This sentence gives an impression like Submariner can be installed only in a zone. When we install Submariner in a Cluster (even with OVN-IC enabled) couple of Submariner pods will run on each and every node of the cluster, but may not be aware of the zone knowledge in the current architecture. So we should clarify that the network-plugin-syncer will only program a single zone and pods in other zones will not be able to communicate with remote clusters.

Author: Done

zone 1 it programs OVN db in zone 1. So only pods in zone 1 nodes will be able to talk to other clusters. Pods in zone 2 or zone 3 will not
be able to reach remote clusters connected via Submariner.

As part of the proposal, we plan to support both the modes and OVN cluster deployments where interconnect
is not enabled as well.

### Route APIs

As part of this proposal, we are planning to add two new CRDs in Submariner. The plan is to decouple OVN dataplane programming so that this
can be moved to OVN, when OVN provides a way to add custom routes. We can propose this CRD or consume the CRD that they provide at a later
point of time.

#### SubmarinerGwRoute

This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is added and there will be one CR per remote cluster. This CRD has two fields

> * NextHops - Specifies the list of next hop to reach the remote cluster, in this case it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0

Reviewer 3: Would be better to clarify that currently we only use a single next-hop and it points to the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface of the active Gateway node.

Author: done.

  interface, the interface used by OVN for host networking.

> * RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of  remote CIDRs reachable via this cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of  remote CIDRs reachable via the next hop.
```

Author: Done.

This CR will be used by the route agent pod running on the active-Gateway node to program OVN to send the traffic destined to
remote clusters via the Submariner tunnel.

``` go
type SubmarinerGwRoute struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec `json:"submarinerRoutePolicySpec"`
}

type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {
    //Specifies the list of next hops to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHops []string `json:"nextHops"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

> #### SubmarinerNonGWRoute

Reviewer 2: Is it the route-agent pod on active GW node responsibility to create also these CRs?

Author: Yes.

This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is created and there will be one created per endpoint.

> * NextHops - Specifies the list of next hops. In this case it will be the transit switch IP.

Reviewer 3: Please add a note saying that in the proposal only a single nextHop will be used and it will point to the transit switch ip of the zone in which the active Gateway is present.

Author: Done

* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of remote CIDRs reachable via this gateway.

* In non-g/w node - If the route-agent pod is not in the same zone as Gateway node zone, send the traffic to the g/w node zone.

> * In g/w node - add route to send the traffic from other zones, destined to remote cluster to the submariner tunnel

Reviewer 2: Hmm, does SubmarinerNonGWRoute controller on active GW node should configure something on OVN ?

Author: As decided now , it is responsible from programming the router policies on ovn-cluster-router with routes and router policies.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, but couldn't the router-agent on gw node use the details from SubmarinerGWRoute CR to program  the router policies on ovn-cluster-router with routes and router policies? 

if we have all the needed info in SubmarinerGWRoute CR we can avoid running the SubmarinerNonGWRoute handler on GW node.

Author: The route agent running on non-gw nodes need to respond as well, for the SubmarinerNonGW route CRD. It is not just the route-agent running on the g/w node that responds

    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec `json:"submarinerRoutePolicySpec"`
}

type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {
    //Specifies the list of next hops to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHops []string `json:"nextHops"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

## Design Details

In this proposal, the plan is to remove the current `submariner-router` and switches that were added to the OVN db. The network-plugin-syncer
shall be removed  and can be replaced by controllers in and Submariner RouteAgent. Since we have multiple ovn db to
program, we need multiple connections. So it makes it easier to program the OVN datapath from RouteAgent, than using
a separate pod. This new approach will work for both IC enabled and existing deployments. With this change we are planning to use the
ovn-k8s-mp0 interface to reach the host networking stack and then the Submariner tunnel. This interface is used by OVN for host-networking
traffic with in a cluster and will be present in every node.

![UpdatedTopology](./images/submariner-ovn-ic.png)

> ### SubmarinerRouteAgentPod

Reviewer 2: Q: How the router-agent pods on non-GW nodes retrieve the GW switch IP address?  is it updated by the router-agent on GW node ?

Author: it is the next hop in SubmarinerNonGWRoute CRD.

Reviewer 2: and it is the responsibility of the route-agent pod on GW node to fill in this information, right ?

Author: yes that is right.

### SubmarinerRouteAgentPod

The Submariner Route-agent pod running on the active gateway node will be responsible for creating the SubmarinerGWRoute CRs. It will be used
only for OVN CNI. For every RemoteEndpointCreated event a SubmarinerGWRoute CR will be created. The nextHop will be the interface IP through
which we can reach the cable driver. In the case of OVN it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0 interface.

> The SubmarinerNonGWRoute CRD will also be created by Submariner Route-agent. It will be created per endpoint and will have remoterCIDRS from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SubmarinerNonGWRoute CRD will also be created by Submariner Route-agent running on the active gateway node. It will be created per endpoint and will have remoterCIDRS from
```

Author: Done.

> which means it is a non-IC setup.

Reviewer 3: Do you mean that if the nextHop is empty, its treated as a non-IC setup or will the CR itself not be created?

Author: we don't need this CR in that case right ? So it will not be created.

> the endpoint. The nextHop will be the transit switch IP of the G/W node. If the transit switch IP is missing this CR will not be created,

Reviewer 2: According to the description above, the transit switch IP is also annotated for OVN single zone deployment.

Author: it depends on the deployment , if it is non-ic setup (legacy one) it will not have an annotation

which means it is a non-IC setup.

The RouteAgent  will have these controllers added to it and the one running in gateway node responds to the CRUD operations of Submariner
endpoints.

#### SubmarinerGWRoute CR Controller

This controller will be responsible for programming the OVN cluster router, it will react only the active g/w node. When a SubmarinerGWRoute

> CR is created or modified the controller shall create or update a routing policy in OVN cluster router with a priority of 20000, and it should

Reviewer 2: What will be used as route Key?

Author: it is Openflow rule , the priority and the match parameters act as the key.

```bash
_uuid               : 0459f009-3603-47ac-8ee7-9d958540ed31
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}
ip_prefix           : "10.132.0.0/16"
nexthop             : "10.1.1.2"
options             : {}
output_port         : []
policy              : []
route_table         : ""
```

> It also programs a route in the ovn-cluster-router, to route the traffic coming from other zones destined to remote cluster IP range via the

Reviewer 3: How does the routeAgent know the traffic coming from the other zones? Should it read the CIDRs allocated to the nodes in the other zones or is stored in some OVN DB?

Author: it will be based on destination ,so any traffic coming to remote cluster CIDR will hit this route. It will be one router per endpoint in the g/w zone.

ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP.

```bash
_uuid               : d55185d8-3732-45c1-ae90-4a7f8cd191f7
bfd                 : []
external_ids        : {}
ip_prefix           : "10.132.0.0/16"
nexthop             : "10.1.1.2"
options             : {}
output_port         : []
policy              : []
route_table         : ""

> ```

Reviewer 3: Except for the UUID this looks same as L150-158

Author: Fixed.

#### SubmarinerNonGWRoute Controller

This controller will run in every route agent pod. This controller connects to the OVN DB. When a SubmarinerNonGWRoute CR is created

> in non-g/w node,  it updates the ovn-cluster-route with a router policy using a priority of 20000 to send the traffic to

Reviewer 2: Can you explain "CR is created
in non-g/w node" ? I thought that we have one SubmarinerNonGWRoute CR  per remote endpoint

Author: updated the sentence.

> This controller will run in every route agent pod. This controller connects to the OVN DB. When a SubmarinerNonGWRoute CR is created
> in non-g/w node,  it updates the ovn-cluster-route with a router policy using a priority of 20000 to send the traffic to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This controller will run as part of every route agent pod and connects to the OVN DB. When a SubmarinerNonGWRoute CR is created, the route-agent running on the non-GW node will update the ovn-cluster-router with a logical router policy using a priority of 20000 to send the traffic to
```

Author: Done.

the remote cluster via next hop mentioned, which is the transit switch IP to the g/w node. Before adding the route it checks if
a route exists, if so it skips adding the route again. This is required to prevent duplicate update since there can be more than
one node in each zone and hence more than one RouteAgent.

```bash
_uuid               : 22db3005-64c5-4e32-aeb0-642423c30742
action              : reroute
external_ids        : {}

> match               : "ip4.dst==10.132.0.0/16"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
match               : "ip4.dst==10.132.0.0/14"
```

The diagram uses 10.132.0.0/14 CIDR, lets keep it consistent.

Author: Done.

nexthop             : []
nexthops            : ["169.254.0.1"]
options             : {"external_ids:{submariner"="true}"}
priority            : 20000
```

### Backward Compatibility

With this architecture, we are removing the logical switches and routers that Submariner created in the existing implementation.
During migration, we will need to delete these components and the routes that network-plugin-syncer installed. After that,
the new controllers shall install the updated routes. The operator needs to be updated as well, not to create a
network-plugin-syncer pods and remove any existing deployments.

> ### Gateway FailOver

Reviewer 2: Few points regarding Gateway FailOver : 
- this is the naive/worst-case solution, I assume that if for example passive and active gateway nodes are assigned to the same OVN zone, no DP reconfiguration is needed  , right ?
-  Should we recommend to label two nodes that shared OVN zone as gateway nodes?  do we need to update cloud-prepare ? 
- The DP configuration is distributed, do we care about the configuration order?
- Maybe it worth to add that we can consider (as future optimization) using VIP to represent the gateway node switch IP instead of reconfiguring all the routes at non-gw nodes

Author: > * is is the naive/worst-case solution, I assume that if for example passive and active gateway nodes are assigned to the same OVN zone, no DP reconfiguration is needed  , right ?

We cannot be sure about the current topology , building intelligence to parse all the nodes and understand it may not be trivial. So despite of same zone or different there will be reconfiguration. Also the ovn-k8s-mp-0 Ip changes when the node changes.

> * Should we recommend to label two nodes that shared OVN zone as gateway nodes?  do we need to update cloud-prepare ?

Not all deployments have multiple nodes in same zone. The common one should be a zone per node.

> * The DP configuration is distributed, do we care about the configuration order?

Order in which it configured does not matter, only when g/w node completes programming other nodes can reach remote cluster.

>Maybe it worth to add that we can consider (as future optimization) using VIP to represent the gateway node 
switch IP instead of reconfiguring all the routes at non-gw nodes

Sorry missed that will add

If there are two gateway nodes , the passive one will work like a non-gateway node. It will not be responsible for creating the CRs.

> In the case of gateway fail-over all the current SubmarinerGWRoute and SubmarinerNonGWRoute will be deleted by the route agent in

Reviewer 2: I don't think we can always ensure that all CRs will be deleted by the route agent in the node that is transitioning to non-gateway node, I assume that it is relevant for graceful switchover.

What value will be used as CR key? is it CR name?

Author: Changed , it will be now done in new g/w node.

> the node that is transitioning to non-gateway node and will be recreated by the new gateway node.

Reviewer 3: If the node transitioning to non-GW node is responsible to delete the entries and the new GW node is responsible to create the CRs, we might have race conditions. Why not handle both in the route-agent that is the new GW node?

Author: Done.

#### Open issues

1. The update from older version of Submariner to a newer version will create  a datapath downtime.
2. When multiple clusters are updated we need to check if one cluster can be done at a time. The cluster will be down
   until all the nodes are updated.
3. When Kubernetes cluster is updated to a version that has IC enabled, there could be a datapath downtime till the
   Submariner g/w node is updated. Since the other nodes need the transit switch IP which will be available only when

>    the g/w node is updated.

Reviewer 4: Interchange point 2 and 3 so we talk about impact on single cluster before multicluster. At end of this point mention "The cluster will be down till all nodes are updated".

For multicluster, instead of need to check, would be better if we mention the impact and suggest upgrade strategy, which could be simple as updating clusters in batches [batch can be of minimum size 1] to avoid any downtime for user applications. Way it is currently worded, it is very vague. As part of this EP we should also capture possible documentation to help users with upgrades.

Author: Changed the order. 

Will update the upgrade section when we complete atleast some part of the implementation and have a way to test it .
We would be more clear about the challenges then.

This CR will be used by the route agent pod running on the active-Gateway node to program OVN to send the traffic destined to
remote clusters via the Submariner tunnel.

``` go
type SubmarinerGwRoute struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

    SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec `json:"submarinerRoutePolicySpec"`
}

type SubmarinerRoutePolicySpec struct {
    //Specifies the list of next hops to reach the remote CIDRs
    NextHops []string `json:"nextHops"`

    //Specifies the remote CIDRs available via the next hop
    RemoteCidr []string `json:"remoteCidr"`
}
```

#### SubmarinerNonGWRoute

This CR will be created when a remote endpoint is created and there will be one created per endpoint.

* NextHops - Specifies the list of next hops. In this case ,we will have only one, and it will be the transit switch IP of the zone
where g/w node is present.
* RemoteCIDR - Specifies the list of remote CIDRs reachable via this gateway.

* In non-g/w node - If the route-agent pod is not in the same zone as Gateway node zone, send the traffic to the g/w node zone.

> * In g/w node - add route to send the traffic from other zones, destined to remote cluster to the submariner tunnel

Reviewer 2: For gw case, can you explain what are the differences between this DP configuration and the one from line 72 above (https://github.com/submariner-io/enhancements/pull/163/files#diff-bd280a9e59e8197a4382d8d40560aa66ac1e49e187beb97aa37b980785990be5R72) ?

Author: Since ovn-cluster router is seperate for each zones, traffic from other zones are by default dropped by ovn cluster router . So this rule is requires to allow traffic from other zones destined to a remote cluster . This is a route . 

The one in 72 is a router policy which direct traffic to tunnel for any traffic , from same zone or different zone to tunnel ,despite of an earlier routing decsion.

Reviewer 2: >Since ovn-cluster router is seperate for each zones, traffic from other zones are by default dropped by ovn cluster router . So this rule is requires to allow traffic from other zones destined to a remote cluster . This is a route .

What information is needed to configure this rule? 
do we have the information needed to configure this rule in NonGatewayRoute CR ?

Author: your are right , this need to be done in response to gatewayRoute  CR  changed.

which we can reach the cable driver. In the case of OVN it will be the IP of ovn-k8s-mp0 interface.

The NonGatewayRoute CRD will also be created by Submariner Route-agent running on the active gateway node . It will be created per endpoint
and will have remoterCIDRS from the endpoint. The nextHop will be the transit switch IP of the G/W node. If the transit switch IP is missing
this CR will not be created, which means it is a non-IC setup.

The RouteAgent  will have these controllers added to it and the one running in gateway node responds to the CRUD operations of Submariner
endpoints.

#### GatewayRoute CR Controller

This controller will be responsible for programming the OVN cluster router, it will react only the active g/w node. When a GatewayRoute
CR is created or modified the controller shall create or update a routing policy in OVN cluster router with a priority of 20000, and it should
redirect any traffic destined to remote CIDR to the ovn-k8s-mp0 interface IP.

```bash
_uuid               : 0459f009-3603-47ac-8ee7-9d958540ed31
action              : reroute
external_ids        : {}
match               : "ip4.dst==10.132.0.0/16"

> nexthop             : []

Reviewer 2: I think we can delete the **nexthop** line

Author: Done.
